Thymus-timeseries
=================

An intuitive library tracking dates and timeseries in common using numpy
arrays.

When working with arrays of timeseries, the manipulation process can
easily cause mismatching sets of arrays in time, arrays in the wrong
order, slow down the analysis, and lead to generally spending more time
to ensure consistency.

This library attempts to address the problem in a way that enables ready
access to the current date range, but stays out of your way most of the
time. Essentially, this library is a wrapper around numpy arrays.

This library grew out of the use of market and trading data. The
timeseries is typically composed of regular intervals but with gaps such
as weekends and holidays. In the case of intra-day data, there are
interuptions due to periods when the market is closed or gaps in
trading.

While the library grew from addressing issues associated with market
data, the implementation does not preclude use in other venues. Direct
access to the numpy arrays is expected and the point of being able to
use the library.

Dependencies
------------

Other than NumPy being installed, there are no other requirements.

Installation
------------

pip install thymus-timeseries

A Brief Look at Capabilities.
-----------------------------

Creating a Small Sample Timeseries Object
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

As a first look, we will create a small timeseries object and show a few
ways that it can used. For this example, we will use daily data.

::

        from datetime import datetime
        import numpy as np

        from thymus.timeseries import Timeseries

        ts = Timeseries()

        # elements of Timeseries()
        key:                (an optional identifier for the timeseries)
        columns: []         (an optional list of column names for the data)
        frequency: d        (the d in this case refers to the default daily data.
                             current frequencies supported are sec, min, h, d, w,
                             m, q, y)

        dseries:            (this is a numpy array of dates in numeric format)

        tseries:            (this is a numpy array of data. most of the work takes
                                place here.)

        end-of-period: True (this is a default indicating that the data is as of
                                the end of the data. This only comes into play when
                                converting from one frequency to another and will
                                be ignored for the moment.)

While normal usage of the timeseries object would involve pulling data
from a database and inserting data into the timeseries object, we will
use a quick-and-dirty method of inputting some data. Dates are stored as
either ordinals or timestamps, avoiding clogging up memory with large
sets of datetime objects. Because it is daily data, ordinals will be
used for this example.

::

        ts = Timeseries()

        start_date = datetime(2015, 12, 31).toordinal()

        ts.dseries = start_date + np.arange(10)
        ts.tseries = np.arange(10)

        ts.make_arrays()

We created an initial timeseries object. It starts at the end of 2015
and continues for 10 days. Setting the values in **dseries** and
**tseries** can be somewhat sloppy. For example, a list could be
assigned initially to either **dseries** (the dates) and a numpy array
to **tseries** (the values).

The use of the **make\_arrays()** function converts the date series to
an int32 array (because they are ordinal values) and **tseries** to a
float64 array. The idea is that the data might often enter the
timeseries object as lists, but then be converted to arrays of
appropriate format for use.

The completed timeseries object is:

::

        print(ts)

        <Timeseries>
        key:
        columns: []
        frequency: d
        daterange: ('2015-12-31', '2016-01-09')
        end-of-period: True
        shape: (10,)

You can see the date range contained in the date series. The shape
refers to the shape of the **tseries** array. **key** and **columns**
are free-form, available to update as appropriate to identify the
timeseries and content of the columns. Again, the **end-of-period** flag
can be ignored right now.

Selection
---------

Selection of elements is the same as numpy arrays. Currently, our sample
has 10 elements.

::

        print(ts[:5])
        <Timeseries>
        key:
        columns: []
        frequency: d
        daterange: ('2015-12-31', '2016-01-04')
        end-of-period: True
        shape: (5,)

Note how the date range above reflects the selected elements.

::

        ts1 = ts % 2 == 0
        ts1.tseries
        [ True False  True False  True False  True False  True False]

We can isolate the dates of even numbers:

::

        # note that tseries, not the timeseries obj, is explicitly used with
        #   np.argwhere.  More on when to operate directly on tseries later.
        evens = np.argwhere((ts % 2 == 0).tseries)

        ts_even = ts[evens]

        # this just prints a list of date and value pairs only useful with
        # very small sets (or examples like this)
        print(ts_even.items('str'))
        ('2015-12-31', '[0.0]')
        ('2016-01-02', '[2.0]')
        ('2016-01-04', '[4.0]')
        ('2016-01-06', '[6.0]')
        ('2016-01-08', '[8.0]')

Date-based Selection
--------------------

So let us use a slightly larger timeseries. 1000 rows 2 columns of data.
And, use random values to ensure uselessness.

::

        ts = Timeseries()

        start_date = datetime(2015, 12, 31).toordinal()

        ts.dseries = start_date + np.arange(1000)
        ts.tseries = np.random.random((1000, 2))

        ts.make_arrays()

        print(ts)

        <Timeseries>
        key:
        columns: []
        frequency: d
        daterange: ('2015-12-31', '2018-09-25')
        end-of-period: True
        shape: (1000, 2)

You can select on the basis of date ranges, but first we will use a row
number technique that is based on slicing. This function is called
**trunc()** for truncation.

::

        # normal truncation -- you will end up with a timeseries with row 100
        # through 499. This provides in-place execution.
        ts.trunc(start=100, finish=500)

        # this version returns a new timeseries, effective for chaining.
        ts1 = ts.trunc(start=100, finish=500, new=True)

But suppose you want to select a specific date range? This leads to the
next function, **truncdate()**.

::

        # select using datetime objects
        ts1 = ts.truncdate(
            start=datetime(2017, 1, 1),
            finish=datetime(2017, 12, 31),
            new=True)

        print(ts1)

        <Timeseries>
        key:
        columns: []
        frequency: d
        daterange: ('2017-01-01', '2017-12-31')
        end-of-period: True
        shape: (365, 2)

As you might expect, the timeseries object has a date range of all the
days during 2017. But see how this is slightly different than slicing.
When you use **truncdate()** it selects everything within the date range
inclusive of the ending date as well. The idea is to avoid having to
always find one day after the date range that you want to select to
accommodate slicing behavior. This way is more convenient.

You can also convert data from a higer frequency to a lower frequency.
Suppose we needed monthly data for 2017 from our timeseries.

::

        start = datetime(2017, 1, 1)
        finish = datetime(2017, 12, 31)
        ts1 = ts.truncdate(start=start, finish=finish, new=True).convert('m')

        print(ts1.items('str'))

        ('2017-01-31', '[0.1724835781570483, 0.9856812220255055]')
        ('2017-02-28', '[0.3855043513164875, 0.30697511661843124]')
        ('2017-03-31', '[0.7067982987769881, 0.7680886691626396]')
        ('2017-04-30', '[0.07770763295126926, 0.04697651222041588]')
        ('2017-05-31', '[0.4473657194650975, 0.49443624153533783]')
        ('2017-06-30', '[0.3793816656495891, 0.03646544387811124]')
        ('2017-07-31', '[0.2783335012003322, 0.5144979569785825]')
        ('2017-08-31', '[0.9261879195281345, 0.6980224313957553]')
        ('2017-09-30', '[0.09531834159018227, 0.5435208082899813]')
        ('2017-10-31', '[0.6865842769906441, 0.7951735180348887]')
        ('2017-11-30', '[0.34901775001111657, 0.7014208950555662]')
        ('2017-12-31', '[0.4731393617405252, 0.630488855197775]')

Or yearly. In this case, we use a flag that governs whether to include
the partial period leading up to the last year. The default includes it.
However, when unwanted the flag, **include\_partial** can be set to
False.

::

        ts1 = ts.convert('y', include_partial=True)

        print(ts1.items('str'))

        ('2015-12-31', '[0.2288539210230056, 0.288320541664724]')
        ('2016-12-31', '[0.5116274142615629, 0.21680312154651182]')
        ('2017-12-31', '[0.4731393617405252, 0.630488855197775]')
        ('2018-09-25', '[0.7634145837512148, 0.32026411425902257]')

        ts2 = ts.convert('y', include_partial=False)

        print(ts2.items('str'))

        ('2015-12-31', '[[0.2288539210230056, 0.288320541664724]]')
        ('2016-12-31', '[[0.5116274142615629, 0.21680312154651182]]')
        ('2017-12-31', '[[0.4731393617405252, 0.630488855197775]]')

Combining Timeseries
--------------------

Suppose you want to combine multiple timeseries together that are of
different lengths? In this case we assume that the two timeseries end on
the same date, but one has a longer tail than the other. However, the
operation that you need requires common dates.

By **combine** we mean instead of two timeseries make one timeseries
that has the columns of both.

::

        ts_short = Timeseries()
        ts_long = Timeseries()

        end_date = datetime(2016, 12, 31)

        ts_short.dseries = [
                (end_date + timedelta(days=-i)).toordinal()
                for i in range(5)]

        ts_long.dseries = [
                (end_date + timedelta(days=-i)).toordinal()
                for i in range(10)]

        ts_short.tseries = np.zeros((5))
        ts_long.tseries = np.ones((10))

        ts_short.make_arrays()
        ts_long.make_arrays()

        ts_combine = ts_short.combine(ts_long)

        print(ts.items('str'))

        ('2016-12-31', '[0.0, 1.0]')
        ('2016-12-30', '[0.0, 1.0]')
        ('2016-12-29', '[0.0, 1.0]')
        ('2016-12-28', '[0.0, 1.0]')
        ('2016-12-27', '[0.0, 1.0]')

The combine function has a couple variations. While it can be helpful to
automatically discard the unwanted rows, you can also enforce that
combining does not take place if the number of rows do not match. Also,
you can build out the missing information with padding to create a
timeseries that has the length of the longest timeseries.

::

        # this would raise an error -- the two are different lengths
        ts_combine = ts_short.combine(ts_long discard=False)

        # this combines, and fills 99 as a missing value
        ts_combine = ts_short.combine(ts_long discard=False, pad=99)

        print(ts_combine.items('str'))
        ('2016-12-31', '[0.0, 1.0]')
        ('2016-12-30', '[0.0, 1.0]')
        ('2016-12-29', '[0.0, 1.0]')
        ('2016-12-28', '[0.0, 1.0]')
        ('2016-12-27', '[0.0, 1.0]')
        ('2016-12-26', '[99.0, 1.0]')
        ('2016-12-25', '[99.0, 1.0]')
        ('2016-12-24', '[99.0, 1.0]')
        ('2016-12-23', '[99.0, 1.0]')
        ('2016-12-22', '[99.0, 1.0]')

The combining can also receive multiple timeseries.

::

        ts_combine = ts_short.combine([ts_long, ts_long, ts_long])

        print(ts_combine.items('str'))
        ('2016-12-31', '[0.0, 1.0, 1.0, 1.0]')
        ('2016-12-30', '[0.0, 1.0, 1.0, 1.0]')
        ('2016-12-29', '[0.0, 1.0, 1.0, 1.0]')
        ('2016-12-28', '[0.0, 1.0, 1.0, 1.0]')
        ('2016-12-27', '[0.0, 1.0, 1.0, 1.0]')

Splitting Timeseries
--------------------

In some ways it would make sense to mirror the **combine()** function
with a **split()** from an aesthetic standpoint. However, splitting is
very straight-forward without such a function. For example, suppose you
want a timeseries that only has the the first two columns from our
previous example. As you can see in the ts\_split tseries, the first two
columns were taken.

::

        ts_split = ts_combine[:, :2]

        print(ts_split.items('str'))
        ('2016-12-31', '[0.0, 1.0]')
        ('2016-12-30', '[0.0, 1.0]')
        ('2016-12-29', '[0.0, 1.0]')
        ('2016-12-28', '[0.0, 1.0]')
        ('2016-12-27', '[0.0, 1.0]')

Arithmetic Operations
---------------------

We have combined timeseries together to stack up rows in common. In
addition, we looked at the issue of mismatched lengths. Now we will look
at arithmetic approaches and some of the design decisions and tradeoffs
associated with mathematical operations.

We will start with the **add()** function. First, if we assume that all
we are adding together are arrays that have exactly the same dateseries,
and therefore the same length, and we assume they have exactly the same
number of columns, then the whole question becomes trivial. If we relax
those constraints, then some choices need to be made.

We will use the long and short timeseries from the previous example.

::

        # this will fail due to dissimilar lengths
        ts_added = ts_short.add(ts_long, match=True)

        # this will work
        ts_added = ts_short.add(ts_long, match=False)

        [ 1.  1.  1.  1.  1.  1.  1.  1.  1.  1.]

The **add()** function checks to see if the number of columns match. If
they do not an error is raised. If the **match** flag is True, then it
also checks that all the dates in both timeseries match prior to the
operation.

If **match** is False, then as long as the columns are compatible, the
operation can take place. It also supports the concept of sparse arrays
as well. For example, suppose you have a timeseries that is primary, but
you would like to add in a timeseries values from only a few dates
within the range. This function will find the appropriate dates adding
in the values at just those rows.

To summarize, all dates in common to both timeseries will be included in
the new timeseries if **match** is False.

Because the previous function is somewhat specialized, you can assume
that the checking of common dates and creating the new timeseries can be
somewhat slower than other approaches.

If we assume some commonalities about our timeseries, then we can do our
work in a more intuitive fashion.

Assumptions of Commonality
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Let us assume that our timeseries might be varying in length, but we
absolutely know what either our starting date or ending date is. And,
let us assume that all the dates for the periods in common to the
timeseries match.

If we accept those assumptions, then a number of operations become quite
easy.

The timeseries object can accept simple arithmetic as if it is an array.
It automatically passes the values on to the **tseries** array. If the
two arrays are not the same length the longer array is truncated to the
shorter length. So if you were add two arrays together that end at the
same date, you would want to sort them latest date to earliest date
using the function **sort\_by\_date()**.

Examples
~~~~~~~~

::

        # starting tseries
        ts.tseries
        [ 0.  1.  2.  3.  4.  5.  6.  7.  8.  9.]

        (ts + 3).tseries
        [  3.   4.   5.   6.   7.   8.   9.  10.  11.  12.]

        # Also, reverse (__radd__)
        (3 + ts).tseries
        [  3.   4.   5.   6.   7.   8.   9.  10.  11.  12.]

        # of course not just addition
        5 * ts.tseries
        [  0.   5.  10.  15.  20.  25.  30.  35.  40.  45.]

Also, in-place operations. But first, we will make a copy.

::

        ts1 = ts.clone()
        ts1.tseries /= 3
        print(ts1.tseries)
        [0.0
        0.3333333333333333
        0.6666666666666666
        1.0
        1.3333333333333333
        1.6666666666666667
        2.0
        2.3333333333333335
        2.6666666666666665
        3.0]

        ts1 = ts ** 3
        ts1.tseries
        0.0
        1.0
        8.0
        27.0
        64.0
        125.0
        216.0
        343.0
        512.0
        729.0

        ts1 = 10 ** ts
        ts1.tseries
        [1.0
        10.0
        100.0
        1000.0
        10000.0
        100000.0
        1000000.0
        10000000.0
        100000000.0
        1000000000.0]

In other words, the normal container functions you can use with numpy
arrays are available to the timeseries objects. The following container
functions for arrays are supported.

::

        __pow__ __add__ __rsub__ __sub__    __eq__      __ge__   __gt__   __le__
        __lt__  __mod__ __mul__  __ne__     __radd__    __rmod__ __rmul__ __rpow__
        __abs__ __pos__ __neg__  __invert__ __rdivmod__ __rfloordiv__
        __floordiv__ __truediv__
        __rtruediv__ __divmod__

        __and__ __or__ __ror__ __rand__ __rxor__ __xor__ __rshift__
        __rlshift__ __lshift__ __rrshift__

        __iadd__ __ifloordiv__ __imod__ __imul__ __ipow__ __isub__
        __itruediv__]

        __iand__ __ilshift__ __ior__ __irshift__ __ixor__

Functions of Arrays Not Supported
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The purpose the timeseries objects is to implement an intuitive usage of
timeseries objects in a fashion that is consistent with NumPy. However,
it is not intended to replace functions that are better handled
explicitly with the **dseries** and **tseries** arrays directly. The
difference will be clear by comparing the list of functions for the
timeseries object versus a numpy array. Most of the functions of the
timeseries object is related to handling the commonality of date series
with time series. You can see that the bulk of the thymus functions
relate to maintenance of the coordination betwee the date series and
timeseries. The meat of the functions still lie with the numpy arrays.

::

    # timeseries members and functions:
    ts.add                   ts.daterange             ts.get_pcdiffs           ts.series_direction
    ts.as_dict               ts.datetime_series       ts.header                ts.set_ones
    ts.as_json               ts.dseries               ts.if_dseries_match      ts.set_zeros
    ts.as_list               ts.end_date              ts.if_tseries_match      ts.shape
    ts.clone                 ts.end_of_period         ts.items                 ts.sort_by_date
    ts.closest_date          ts.extend                ts.key                   ts.start_date
    ts.columns               ts.fmt_date              ts.lengths               ts.trunc
    ts.combine               ts.frequency             ts.make_arrays           ts.truncdate
    ts.common_length         ts.get_date_series_type  ts.months                ts.tseries
    ts.convert               ts.get_datetime          ts.replace               ts.years
    ts.date_native           ts.get_diffs             ts.reverse
    ts.date_string_series    ts.get_duped_dates       ts.row_no

    # numpy functions in the arrays
    ts.tseries.T             ts.tseries.cumsum        ts.tseries.min           ts.tseries.shape
    ts.tseries.all           ts.tseries.data          ts.tseries.nbytes        ts.tseries.size
    ts.tseries.any           ts.tseries.diagonal      ts.tseries.ndim          ts.tseries.sort
    ts.tseries.argmax        ts.tseries.dot           ts.tseries.newbyteorder  ts.tseries.squeeze
    ts.tseries.argmin        ts.tseries.dtype         ts.tseries.nonzero       ts.tseries.std
    ts.tseries.argpartition  ts.tseries.dump          ts.tseries.partition     ts.tseries.strides
    ts.tseries.argsort       ts.tseries.dumps         ts.tseries.prod          ts.tseries.sum
    ts.tseries.astype        ts.tseries.fill          ts.tseries.ptp           ts.tseries.swapaxes
    ts.tseries.base          ts.tseries.flags         ts.tseries.put           ts.tseries.take
    ts.tseries.byteswap      ts.tseries.flat          ts.tseries.ravel         ts.tseries.tobytes
    ts.tseries.choose        ts.tseries.flatten       ts.tseries.real          ts.tseries.tofile
    ts.tseries.clip          ts.tseries.getfield      ts.tseries.repeat        ts.tseries.tolist
    ts.tseries.compress      ts.tseries.imag          ts.tseries.reshape       ts.tseries.tostring
    ts.tseries.conj          ts.tseries.item          ts.tseries.resize        ts.tseries.trace
    ts.tseries.conjugate     ts.tseries.itemset       ts.tseries.round         ts.tseries.transpose
    ts.tseries.copy          ts.tseries.itemsize      ts.tseries.searchsorted  ts.tseries.var
    ts.tseries.ctypes        ts.tseries.max           ts.tseries.setfield      ts.tseries.view
    ts.tseries.cumprod       ts.tseries.mean          ts.tseries.setflags

Other Date Functions
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Variations on a theme:

::

        # truncation
        ts.truncdate(
            start=datetime(2017, 1, 1),
            finish=datetime(2017, 12, 31))

        # just start date etc.
        ts.truncdate(
            start=datetime(2017, 1, 1))

        # this was in date order but suppose it was in reverse order?
        # this result will give the same answer
        ts1 = ts.truncdate(
            start=datetime(2017, 1, 1),
            new=True)

        ts.reverse()

        ts1 = ts.truncdate(
            start=datetime(2017, 1, 1),
            new=True)

        # use the date format native to the dateseries (ordinal / timestamp)
        ts1 = ts.truncdate(
            start=datetime(2017, 1, 1).toordinal(),
            new=True)

        # suppose you start with a variable that represents a date range
        # date range can be either a list or tuple
        ts.truncdate(
            [datetime(2017, 1, 1), datetime(2017, 12, 31)])

Assorted Date Functions
-----------------------

::

        # native format
        ts.daterange()
        (735963, 735972)

        # str format
        ts.daterange('str')
        ('2015-12-31', '2016-01-09')

        # datetime format
        ts.daterange('datetime')
        (datetime.datetime(2015, 12, 31, 0, 0), datetime.datetime(2016, 1, 9, 0, 0))

        # native format
        ts.start_date(); ts.end_date()
        735963  735972

        # str format
        ts.start_date('str'); ts.end_date('str')
        2015-12-31  2016-01-09

        # datetime format
        ts.start_date('datetime'); ts.end_date('datetime')
        2015-12-31 00:00:00  2016-01-09 00:00:00

Sometimes it is helpful to find a particular row based on the date.
Also, that date might not be in the dateseries, and so, the closest date
will suffice.

We will create a sample timeseries to illustrate.

::

        ts = Timeseries()
        ts.dseries = []
        ts.tseries = []

        start_date = datetime(2015, 12, 31)
        for i in range(40):
            date = start_date + timedelta(days=i)
            if date.weekday() not in [5, 6]:   # skipping weekends

                ts.dseries.append(date.toordinal())
                ts.tseries.append(i)

        ts.make_arrays()

        # row_no, date
        (0, '2015-12-31')
        (1, '2016-01-01')
        (2, '2016-01-04')
        (3, '2016-01-05')
        (4, '2016-01-06')
        (5, '2016-01-07')
        (6, '2016-01-08')
        (7, '2016-01-11')
        (8, '2016-01-12')
        (9, '2016-01-13')
        (10, '2016-01-14')
        (11, '2016-01-15')
        (12, '2016-01-18')
        (13, '2016-01-19')
        (14, '2016-01-20')
        (15, '2016-01-21')
        (16, '2016-01-22')
        (17, '2016-01-25')
        (18, '2016-01-26')
        (19, '2016-01-27')
        (20, '2016-01-28')
        (21, '2016-01-29')
        (22, '2016-02-01')
        (23, '2016-02-02')
        (24, '2016-02-03')
        (25, '2016-02-04')
        (26, '2016-02-05')
        (27, '2016-02-08')

        date1 = datetime(2016, 1, 7)    # existing date within date series
        date2 = datetime(2016, 1, 16)   # date falling on a weekend
        date3 = datetime(2015, 6, 16)   # date prior to start of date series
        date4 = datetime(2016, 3, 8)    # date after to end of date series

        # as datetime and in the series
        existing_row = ts.row_no(rowdate=date1, closest=1)
        5

        existing_date = ts.closest_date(rowdate=date1, closest=1)
        print(datetime.fromordinal(existing_date))
        2016-01-07 00:00:00

        # as datetime but date not in series
        next_row = ts.row_no(rowdate=date2, closest=1)
        12

        next_date = ts.closest_date(rowdate=date2, closest=1)
        print(datetime.fromordinal(next_date))
        2016-01-18 00:00:00

        prev_row = ts.row_no(rowdate=date2, closest=-1)
        11

        prev_date = ts.closest_date(rowdate=date2, closest=-1)
        print(datetime.fromordinal(prev_date))
        2016-01-15 00:00:00

        # this will fail -- date is outside the date series
        # as datetime but date not in series, look for earlier date
        ts.closest_date(rowdate=date3, closest=-1)

        # this will fail -- date is outside the date series
        ts.closest_date(rowdate=date4, closest=1)

Functions by Category
---------------------

Output
~~~~~~

ts.as\_dict()
^^^^^^^^^^^^^

::

        Returns the time series as a dict with the date as the key and without
        the header information.

ts.as\_json(indent=2)
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

::

        This function returns the timeseries in JSON format and includes the
        header information.

ts.as\_list()
^^^^^^^^^^^^^

::

        Returns the timeseries as a list.

ts.header()
^^^^^^^^^^^

::

        This function returns a dict of the non-timeseries data.

ts.items(fmt=None)
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

::

        This function returns the date series and the time series as if it
        is in one list. The term items used to suggest the iteration of dicts
        where items are the key, value combination.

        if fmt == 'str':
            the dates are output as strings

ts.months(include\_partial=True)
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

::

        This function provides a quick way to summarize daily (or less)
        as monthly data.

        It is basically a pass-through to the convert function with more
        decoration of the months.

        Usage:

            months(include_partial=True)

            returns a dict with year-month as keys

ts.years(include\_partial=True)
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

::

        This function provides a quick way to summarize daily (or less)
        as yearly data.

        It is basically a pass-through to the convert function with more
        decoration of the years.

        Usage:

            years(include_partial=True)

            returns a dict with year as keys

ts.datetime\_series()
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

::

        This function returns the dateseries converted to a list of
        datetime objects.

ts.date\_string\_series(dt\_fmt=None)
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

::

        This function returns a list of the dates in the timeseries as
        strings.

        Usage:
            self.date_string_series(dt_fmt=None)

        dt_fmt is a datetime mask to alter the default formatting.

Array Manipulation
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

ts.add(ts, match=True)
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

::

        Adds two timeseries together.

        if match is True:
            means there should be a one to one corresponding date in each time
            series.  If not raise error.
        else:
            means that timeseries with sporadic or missing dates can be added

        Note: this does not evaluate whether both timeseries have the same
                number of columns. It will fail if they do not.

        Returns the timeseries. Not in-place.

ts.clone()
^^^^^^^^^^

::

        This function returns a copy of the timeseries.

ts.combine(tss, discard=True, pad=None)
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

::

        This function combines timeseries into a single array. Combining in
        this case means accumulating additional columns of information.

        Truncation takes place at the end of rows. So if the timeseries is
        sorted from latest dates to earliest dates, the older values would be
        removed.

        Usage:
            self.combine(tss, discard=True, pad=None)

        Think of tss as the plural of timeseries.

        If discard:
            Will truncate all timeseries lengths down to the shortest
            timeseries.

        if discard is False:
            An error will be raised if the all the lengths do not match

            unless:
                if pad is not None:
                    the shorter timeseries will be padded with the value pad.

        Returns the new ts.

ts.common\_length(ts1, ts2)
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

::

        This static method trims the lengths of two timeseries and returns two
        timeseries with the same length.

        The idea is that in order to do array operations there must be a
        common length for each timeseries.

        Reflecting the bias for using timeseries sorted from latest info to
        earlier info, truncation takes place at the end of the array. That
        way older less important values are removed if necessary.

        Usage:
            ts1_new, ts2_new = self.common_length(ts1, ts2)

ts.convert(new\_freq, include\_partial=True, \*\*kwargs)
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

::

        This function returns the timeseries converted to another frequency,
        such as daily to monthly.

        Usage:
            convert(new_freq, include_partial=True, **kwargs)

        The only kwarg is
            weekday=<some value>

        This is used when converting to weekly data. The weekday number
        corresponds to the the datetime.weekday() function.

ts.extend(ts, overlay=True)
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

::

        This function combines a timeseries to another, taking into account the
        possibility of overlap.

        This assumes that the frequency is the same.

        This function is chiefly envisioned to extend a timeseries with
        additional dates.

        Usage:
            self.extend(ts, overlay=True)

        If overlay is True then the incoming timeseries will overlay
        any values that are duplicated.

ts.trunc(start=None, finish=None, new=False)
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

::

        This function truncates in place, typically.

        truncate from (start:finish)
        remember start is lowest number, latest date

        This truncation works on the basis of slicing, so
        finish is not inclusive.

        Usage:
            self.trunc(start=None, finish=None, new=False)

ts.truncdate(start=None, finish=None, new=False)
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

::

        This function truncates in place on the basis of dates.

        Usage:
            self.truncdate(start=None, finish=None, new=False)

        start and finish are dates, input as either datetime or the actual
        internal format of the **dseries** (ordinals or timestamps).

        If the dates are not actually in the list, the starting date will
        be the next viable date after the start date requested. If the finish
        date is not available, the previous date from the finish date will be
        the last.

        If new is True, the timeseries will not be modified in place. Rather
        a new timeseries will be returned instead.

ts.replace(ts, match=True)
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

::

        This function replaces values where the dates match an incoming
        timeseries. So if the incoming date on the timeseries matches, the
        value in the current timeseries will be replaced by the incoming
        timeseries.

        Usage:
            self.replace(ts, match=True)

        If match is False, the incoming timseries may have dates not found in
        the self timeseries.

        Returns the modified timeseries. Not in place.

ts.reverse()
^^^^^^^^^^^^

::

        This function does in-place reversal of the timeseries and dateseries.

ts.get\_diffs()
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

::

        This function gets the differences between values from date to date in
        the timeseries.

ts.get\_pcdiffs()
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

::

        This function gets the percent differences between values in the
        timeseries.

        No provision for dividing by zero here.

ts.set\_ones(fmt=None, new=False)
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

::

        This function converts an existing timeseries to ones using the same
        shape as the existing timeseries.

        It is used as a convenience to create an empty timeseries with a
        specified date range.

        if fmt use as shape

        usage:
            set_ones(self, fmt=None, new=False)

ts.set\_zeros(fmt=None, new=False)
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

::

        This function converts an existing timeseries to zeros using the same
        shape as the existing timeseries.

        It is used as a convenience to create an empty timeseries with a
        specified date range.

        if fmt use as shape

        usage:
            set_zeros(self, fmt=None, new=False)

ts.sort\_by\_date(reverse=False, force=False)
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

::

        This function converts a timeseries to either date order or reverse
        date order.

        Usage:
            sort_by_date(self, reverse=False, force=False)

        If reverse is True, then order will be newest to oldest.
        If force is False, the assumption is made that comparing the first
        and last date will determine the current order of the timeseries. That
        would mean that unnecessary sorting can be avoided. Also, if the order
        needs to be reversed, the sort is changed via the less expensive
        reverse function.

        If dates and values are in no particular order, with force=True, the
        actual sort takes place.

        This function changes the data in-place.

Evaluation
~~~~~~~~~~

ts.daterange(fmt=None)
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

::

        This function returns the starting and ending dates of the timeseries.

        Usage:

            self.daterange()
                (735963, 735972)

            self.daterange('str')
                ('2015-12-31', '2016-01-09')

            self.daterange('datetime')
                (datetime(2015, 12, 31, 0, 0),
                 datetime.datetime(2016, 1, 9, 0, 0))

ts.start\_date(fmt=None)
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

::

        This function returns the starting date of the timeseries in its
        native value, timestamp or ordinal.

        If fmt is 'str' returns in string format
        If fmt is 'datetime' returns in string format

ts.end\_date(fmt=None)
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

::

        This funtcion returns the ending date of the timeseries in its native
        value, timestamp or ordinal.

        If fmt is 'str' returns in string format
        If fmt is 'datetime' returns in string format

ts.get\_duped\_dates()
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

::

        This function pulls dates that are duplicated. This is to be used to
        locate timeseries that are faulty.

        Usage:
            get_duped_dates()

            returns [[odate1, count], [odate2, count]]

ts.series\_direction()
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

::

        if a lower row is a lower date, then 1 for ascending
        if a lower row is a higher date then -1 for descending

ts.get\_date\_series\_type()
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

::

        This function returns the date series type associated with the
        timeseries.  The choices are TS_ORDINAL or TS_TIMESTAMP.

ts.if\_dseries\_match(ts)
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

::

        This function returns True if the date series are the same.

ts.if\_tseries\_match(ts)
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

::

        This function returns True if the time series are the same.

Utilities
~~~~~~~~~

ts.date\_native(date)
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

::

        This awkwardly named function returns a date in the native format of
        of the timeseries, namely ordinal or timestamp.

ts.row\_no(rowdate, closest=0, no\_error=False)
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

::

        Shows the row in the timeseries

        Usage:
            ts.row(rowdate=<datetime>)
            ts.row(rowdate=<date as either ordinal or timestamp>)

        Returns an error if the date is not found in the index

        if closest is invoked:
            closest = 1
                find the closest date after the rowdate
            closest = -1
                find the closest date before the rowdate

        If no_error
            returns -1 instead of raising an error if the date was
            outside of the timeseries.

ts.get\_datetime(date)
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

::

        This function returns a date as a datetime object.
        This takes into account the type of date stored in **dseries**.

        Usage:
            self.get_datetime(date)

ts.lengths()
^^^^^^^^^^^^

::

        This function returns the lengths of both the date series and time
        series. Both numbers are included in case a mismatch has occurred.

ts.shape()
^^^^^^^^^^

::

        This function return the shape of the timeseries. This is a shortcut
        to putting in ts.tseries.shape.

ts.fmt\_date(numericdate, dt\_type, dt\_fmt=None)
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

::

        This static method accepts a date and converts it to
        the format used in the timeseries.

ts.make\_arrays()
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

::

        Convert the date and time series lists (if so) to numpy arrays

ts.get\_fromDB(\*\*kwargs)
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

::

        This is just a stub to suggest a viable name for getting data from a
        database.

ts.save\_toDB(\*\*kwargs):
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

::

        This is just a stub to suggest a viable name for saving data to a
        database.

